---
title: Borel Sigma-Algebras
linktitle: 2. Borel Sigma-Algebras
toc: true
type: docs
date: "2020-05-27T00:00:00Z"
draft: false
menu:
  measure_integration:
    parent: Measure
    weight: 2

# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 2
---
*This section of notes summarizes material from 37:40 to 58:16 of Dr. Frederic Schuller's lecture on measure theory, viewable on [YouTube](https://youtu.be/6ad9V8gvyBQ?t=2216).*

## Motivation
How does one specify, in practice, a $\sigma$-algebra?  It's a bit like a topology, in that it may contain very strange sets (or collections of sets).  Likewise, just as one cannot say whether an object is a vector without reference to some underlying vector space, we cannot say whether a set is measurable without reference to some underlying measurable space of which it may be an element. 

One way to specify a measure space is to have a measure space already and then to construct another one (this is called *inheritance*).  But what if one does not have a $\sigma$-algebra yet?  

## Generators
**Definition / Theorem.** For a set $\Omega$ and a collection of subsets $\mathfrak{A} \subseteq \mathscr{P}(\Omega)$, the smallest $\sigma$-algebra of $\Omega$ that contains $\mathfrak{A}$ is defined as 
$$\sigma(\mathfrak{A}) = \\{A \subseteq \Omega \\; | \\; \forall \\; \mathfrak{F} \\; \text{with} \\; \mathfrak{A} \subseteq \mathfrak{F}, A \in \mathfrak{F}\\}$$
where $\mathfrak{F}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra of $\Omega$.

In other words, 
$$\sigma(\mathfrak{A}) = \bigcap_{\mathfrak{F}: \mathfrak{A} \subseteq \mathfrak{F}} \mathfrak{F}.$$

We call $\sigma(\mathfrak{A})$ the $\sigma$ *-algebra generated by* $\mathfrak{A}$.  We leave as an exercise the proof that this intersection is a $\sigma$-algebra.

**Theorem.**  Every $\sigma$-algebra can be written as $\mathfrak{F} = \sigma(\mathfrak{A})$.

This construction immediately allows us to link the notions of topology and $\sigma$-algebra for a set $\mathfrak{A}$.  

## Borel Sigma-Algebra
**Definition.** Let $(\Omega, \mathscr{O})$ be a topological space.  Then $\mathfrak{B} := \sigma(\mathscr{O})$ is called the *Borel $\sigma$ -algebra* of $(\Omega, \mathscr{O})$.

Why would one do this when one could just as well take a topological space and establish a $\sigma$-algebra that has nothing to do with the topology?  For example, one could have a Hilbert space with an inner product and establish a norm that has nothing to do with the inner product; in that case one would not end up with the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.  In general, if one has a strong structure that is able to imply another structure, one will establish the other structure in such a way that it is being induced.  

Now let's start with Hilbert space.  We have an inner product; from there we induce a norm.  From the norm we would induce the standard topology by defining the open balls using the norm.  Once we have the topology we induce the Borel $\sigma$-algebra, so we only made one choice, namely for inner product.  Which is a very strong choice!  If we make a strong choice, usually the weaker structures we derive from them.  Thus we get stronger theorems from the relations of these structures.  

## Instructive Example
Consider the real line equipped with the standard topology; that is, let $\Omega = \mathbb{R}, \mathscr{O}=\mathscr{O}_{\mathbb{R}}$. Then we have $\mathfrak{B} = \sigma(\mathscr{O})$.  Clearly, for all $a, b \in \mathbb{R}$ we have $(a, b) \in \mathfrak{B}$.  Then by the closedness of $\sigma$-algebras under countable intersections, we have 

$$ \bigcap_{n \geq 1} \left(a- \frac{1}{n}, b \right) = [a, b) \in \mathfrak{B}.$$

By similar argument, we can see that the set of all closed intervals are contained within $\mathfrak{B}$ as well, but with the half-open intervals $[a, b)$ we can construct the Lebesgue measure, as we shall see in the next section.  
